---
layout: post
title:  "The cost of bad employee onboarding"
description: "Not playing close enough attention to your onboarding practices can have a big impact on the how long employees stay at your organization."
date:   2020-07-30 13:44:48 -0500
permalink: blog/the-cost-of-bad-employee-onboarding
---
Let's start by saying your new hire onboarding probably isn't bad – it's just not everything it could be. If you're feeling self-conscious about your onboarding, you're not alone. According to Gallup, [only 12% of employees strongly agree that their organization did a great job onboarding](https://news.gallup.com/reports/199961/state-american-workplace-report-2017.aspx){:target="_blank"}. So what's the worst that can happen?

The Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM) says [employee turnover can be as much as 50% in the first 18 months](http://www.shrm.org/foundation/ourwork/initiatives/resources-from-past-initiatives/Documents/Onboarding%20New%20Employees.pdf){:target="_blank"}. In fact, [33% of new hires start the search for their next job in the first 6 months](https://hbr.org/2015/03/technology-can-save-onboarding-from-itself){:target="_blank"} at a company. High functioning teams know that one of the keys to working together effectively and quickly is to have strong relationships with one another. If half your company is churning out every 18 months it is really hard to build up those relationships.

Not only is it a detriment to team success, but it's incredibly costly to have to continually rehire for the same position. [It can cost  100-300% of the employee's salary to replace them](https://hbr.org/2015/03/technology-can-save-onboarding-from-itself){:target="_blank"} when factoring in hard costs and lost hours and effort. Whether you're well-established or are scaling quickly, it's difficult to justify that kind of expense.

## How can onboarding fix my retention problem?
It's a candidate's market in many industries, especially technology, with the most qualified candidates receiving offers from multiple companies. Once they've accepted an offer with your organization, do everything you can to ensure them that they have made the right choice. We've all had the first day jitters and questioned if we had made the right move in taking a new job. Quash those doubts through a comprehensive onboarding process. Have a plan in place for the first few weeks on the job and set expectations for the new hire. Having a firm grasp on on those expectations and an ability to measure success go a long way in building confidence and ensuring the new hire that they're on pace. Every encounter in the first 90 days of a new employee's journey should be accounted for. Show these people that they are part of your team and that you're investing in them and care about how they do at your company. Intentionality goes a long ways.

## So where do I go from here?
Revisit your current onboarding checklist. Is it all clerical items? Is there a human element? What kind of things make your employees feel empowered to do their jobs? What kind of things connect them to the mission of the company? Incorporate those things into your onboarding. If you're still small enough, meeting employee at a company can quickly create a strong sense of community that's hard to achieve through other means. Building these human touches into your onboarding will strengthen your retention potential and give meaning and purpose to a new hire's early days at your company.